docs: Update Encrypt and Decrypt to clarify streaming (#149)
awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification: client-apis/encrypt.md

### Plaintext

The plaintext to encrypt.

> This MUST be a sequence of bytes.

Reviewer: See my comment on this here: https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/pull/154#discussion_r455248406

Multiple places in the specification should be able to say X "is a sequence of bytes" without getting into these details over and over again. IF we want to get into those details they should be in a top level concept feature similar to streaming.md.

### Plaintext

The plaintext to encrypt.
This MUST be a sequence of bytes.

This input MAY be streamed to this operation.
This means that bytes are made available to this operation sequentially and over time,
and that an end to the input is eventually indicated.
This means that:

- There MUST be a mechanism for input bytes to become available to be processed.
- There MUST be a mechanism to indicate that there are no more input bytes,

>   or whether more bytes MAY be made available in the future.

Reviewer: I think it's worth lifting this definition into its own client-apis/streaming.md feature, or perhaps adding to structures.md. You can focus there on terminology definitions (things like the "EOF" that is a separate signal and NOT an EOF marker, the idea of "releasing" data, etc), describe more explicitly what it means for an operation to take a stream as input vs. produce a stream as output, and so on. It will also help shorten and focus the content here.

Author: Moved these concerns to client-api/streaming.md

This behavior MUST output the following if the behavior is successful:

- [encrypted message](#encrypted-message)

### Encrypted Message

An encrypted form of the input [plaintext](#plaintext),
encrypted according to the [operation specified below](#operation).
This MUST be a sequence of bytes
and conform to the [message format specification](../data-format/message.md).

This operation MAY stream the encrypted message to the caller.

- The operation MAY release the output message sequentially and temporally to the caller.
- The operation MUST be able to indicate an end to the released sequential output.

## Operation

The Encrypt operation is divided into several distinct parts:

- [Get the encryption materials](#get-the-encryption-materials)
- [Construct the header](#construct-the-header)
- [Construct the body](#construc-the-body)
- [(Optional) Construct the signature](#construct-the-signature)

This operation MUST perform these steps in order.
These steps calculate and serialize the components of the output [encrypted message](#encrypted-message).
Any data that is not specified within the [message format](../data-format/message.md)
MUST NOT be added to the output message.

> The bytes of the output encrypted message MAY be released to the caller as soon as they are serialized.

Reviewer 2: I don't think so...?
The encrypt operation MUST know where the end is.
Especially for framed messages.
I suppose it could be up to the implementation,
but this seems like something that is easy to get wrong.

e.g. Frame Length is 4K, and I send 100 byte chunks
and then send EOF after 10 chunks (1K).
The header can be released, but
if the body header has been sent
it is probably wrong.

Also, the plaintext length bound
is just an estimate,
so I don't think we can rely on it
as a single to send the final frame.

Author: I'm not sure I understand your example. If the operation has successfully serialized a frame, it should be able to release that frame.

Author: Note: Update to SHOULD.

We do not state what it means to be "serialized", so there are parts where this wording is confusing.

Author: Update: staying with MAY because I'm unsure how to phrase this while not implying that the operation is the necessarily the actor for releasing the bytes. I think we are still ok as far as stating earlier that you SHOULD NOT extend a streaming API if you need to buffer the whole message.

This behavior MUST output the following if the behavior is successful:

- [encrypted message](#encrypted-message)

### Encrypted Message

An encrypted form of the input [plaintext](#plaintext),
encrypted according to the [operation specified below](#operation).
This MUST be a sequence of bytes
and conform to the [message format specification](../data-format/message.md).

This operation MAY stream the encrypted message.
This means that output bytes are released sequentially and over time,
and that an end to the output is eventually indicated.
This means that:

- There MUST be a mechanism for output bytes to be released
- There MUST be a mechanism to indicate that the entire output has been released,
  or whether more bytes MAY be released in the future.

If an implementation requires holding the entire input plaintext in memory in order to perform this operation,
that implementation SHOULD NOT provide an API that allows this output to be streamed.

## Operation

The Encrypt operation is divided into several distinct parts:

- [Get the encryption materials](#get-the-encryption-materials)
- [Construct the header](#construct-the-header)

> - [Construct the body](#construc-the-body)

Reviewer 3: np: `construc` -> `construct`

This behavior MUST output the following if the behavior is successful:

> - [encrypted message](#encrypted-message)

Reviewer 2: Yes

> - [encrypted message](#encrypted-message)

Author: Done.

Note that if the key derivation algorithm is the [identity KDF](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#identity-kdf),
then the derived data key is the same as the plaintext data key.

The frame length used in the procedures described below is the input [frame length](#frame-size),
if supplied.
If a frame length is not specified on input, this operation MUST choose a reasonable value to

> default to.

Reviewer 2: I think that all implementations use 4K.
I can get down with this not being in the spec,
but I would like to be cognitive about that ;)

  [encrypted data keys](../framework/structures.md#encrypted-data-keys) in the [encryption materials](../framework/structures.md#encryption-materials)
- [Content Type](../data-format/message-header.md#content-type): MUST be [02](../data-format/message-header.md#supported-content-types)
- [IV Length](../data-format/message-header.md#iv-length): MUST match the [IV length](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#iv-length)
  specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md)
- [Frame Length](../data-format/message-header.md#frame-length): MUST be the value of the frame size determined above.

After serializing the message header body,
this operation MUST calculate an [authentication tag](../data-format/message-header.md#authentication-tag)
over the message header body.
The value of this MUST be the output of the [authenticated encryption algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#encryption-algorithm)
specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md), with the following inputs:

- The AAD is the serialized [message header body](../data-format/message-header.md#header-body).
- The IV has a value of 0.
- The cipherkey is the derived data key

> - The plaintext is an empty byte array

Reviewer 4: As earlier, we may want to lift this out to the suites section.

Reviewer 2: If we are thinking of moving this to the suites,
(which I like)
should we also move
the equivalent body parts?
The Body AAD et. al.

with the remaining plaintext.

### Construct a frame

To construct a regular or final frame that represents the next frame in the encrypted message's body,
this operation MUST calculate encrypted content and an authentication tag using the
[authenticated encryption algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#encryption-algorithm)
specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md),
with the following inputs:

- The AAD is the serialized [message body AAD](../data-format/message-body-aad.md),
  constructed as follows:
  - The [message ID](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#message-id) is the same as the
    [message ID](../data-frame/message-header.md#message-id) serialized in the header of this message.
  - The [Body AAD Content](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#body-aad-content) depends on
    whether the thing being encrypted is a regular frame or final frame.
    Refer to [Message Body AAD](../data-format/message-body-aad.md) specification for more information.
  - The [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number) is the sequence
    number of the frame being encrypted.
    If this is the first frame sequentially, this value MUST be 1.

>     Otherwise, this value MUST be 1 greater than the value of the sequence number

Reviewer 2: Unless it is the final frame.

Author: See related comment above.

    of the previous frame.
  - The [content length](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#content-length) MUST have a value

>     equal to the length of the plaintext being encrypted.

Reviewer 2: I think that "length of the plaintext" in ambiguous in this context.
Since we are talking about a frames this MUST be the  <= frame length.

Author: This is specified more clearly below, but I've brought that up here as well. I'm unsure how to reduce redundancies here in a good way.

- The IV is the [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number)

>   used in the message body AAD above.

Reviewer 2: As noted above padded with 0 to 12 bytes. (Which is also specified by the algorithm suite...)

Author: Updated.

the [signature calculation](#signature-calculation).

### Construct the Signature

If the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md) contains a [signature algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#signature-algorithm),
this operation MUST calculate a signature over the message,
and the output [encrypted message](#encrypted-message) MUST contain a [message footer](../data-format/message-footer.md).

To calculate a signature, this operation MUST use the [signature algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#signature-algorithm)
specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md), with the following input:

- the signature key is the [signing key](../framework/structures.md#signing-key) in the [encryption materials](../framework/structures.md#encryption-materials)
- the input to sign is the concatenation of the serialization of the [message header](../data-format/message-header.md) and [message body](../data-format/message-body.md)

Note that the message header and message body MAY have already been inputted during previous steps.

This operation MUST then serialize serialized a message footer with the following specifics:

> - [Signature](../data-format/message-footer.md#signature): MUST be the output of the calculation above.

Reviewer 2: Well, not exactly.  Since the above calculation does not include a length.

Author: Added spec for the signature length field.

Note that if the key derivation algorithm is the [identity KDF](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#identity-kdf),
then the derived data key is the same as the plaintext data key.

> The frame length used in the procedures described below is the input [frame length](#frame-size),

Reviewer 3: Should this link be to `../data-format/message-header.md#frame-length`?

Author: Should be #frame-length, referring to the input defined earlier in the spec.

if supplied.
If a frame length is not specified on input, this operation MUST choose a reasonable value to

> default to.

Reviewer 3: If possible we should define what a "reasonable value" is (or at least how to determine one).

  padded to the [IV length](../data-format/message-header.md#iv-length).
- [Authentication Tag](../data-format/message-header.md#authentication-tag): MUST have the value
  of the authentication tag calculated above.

Once the entire message header has been authenticated and serialized,
the serialized message header MAY be released.

The encrypted message outputted by this operation MUST have a message header equal
to the message header calculated in this step.

If the algorithm suite contains a signature algorithm and
this operation is streaming the encrypted message output to the caller,
this operation MUST input the serialized header to the signature algorithm as soon as it is serialized,
such that the serialized header isn't required to remain in memory to complete
the [signature calculation](#signature-calculation).

## Construct the body

The encrypted message outputted by this operation MUST have a message body equal
to the message body calculated in this step.

While there MAY still be plaintext left to encrypt,
this operation MUST either wait for more plaintext to become available,
wait for an end to the plaintext to be indicated,

> or to perform encryption on the available plaintext to construct frames

Reviewer 3: Should `or to perform encryption` be `or perform encryption`? I don't think it's a `or wait to perform encryption`, but I could be wrong.

which make up the message body.

Frames MUST be constructed sequentially such that the concatenation of their decryption

> in [sequence number](#.../data-format/message-body/md#sequence-number)

Reviewer 3: np: `message-body/md` -> `message-body.md`

order is equal to the input plaintext which has been encrypted so far.

If more input plaintext MAY become available
and there are not enough input plaintext bytes available to create a new
[regular frame](#../data-format/message-body.md#regular-frame),
then this operation MUST wait until either enough plaintext bytes become available

> or the caller indicates an end to the plaintext.

Reviewer 3: How do we indicate an end to the plaintext? I believe in an earlier doc you mentioned `EOF`. Should we specify that here?

Author: This varies based on how streaming is done in the specific language. I updated the EOF to mirror this wording, but if we think it would be more clear to to refer to it as EOF (and maybe add it as a definition), I can do that instead.

Reviewer 3: Up to you. It might make sense to give an example of 1 or 2 languages but leave the spec as language-agnostic as possible.

If more input plaintext MAY become available
and there is enough plaintext available to construct a new regular frame,
then this operation MUST [construct a regular frame](#construct-a-frame)

> with the avilable plaintext.

Reviewer 3: np: `avilable` -> `available`

If more input plaintext MUST NOT become available
and there is exactly enough plaintext bytes available to create one regular frame,
then this operation MUST [construct either a final frame or regular frame](#construct-a-frame)
with the remaining plaintext.

> If they construct a regular frame, they MUST also construct a empty final frame.

Reviewer 3: np: `a empty` -> `an empty`

with the following inputs:

- The AAD is the serialized [message body AAD](../data-format/message-body-aad.md),
  constructed as follows:
  - The [message ID](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#message-id) is the same as the
    [message ID](../data-frame/message-header.md#message-id) serialized in the header of this message.
  - The [Body AAD Content](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#body-aad-content) depends on
    whether the thing being encrypted is a regular frame or final frame.
    Refer to [Message Body AAD](../data-format/message-body-aad.md) specification for more information.
  - The [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number) is the sequence
    number of the frame being encrypted.
    If this is the first frame sequentially, this value MUST be 1.
    Otherwise, this value MUST be 1 greater than the value of the sequence number
    of the previous frame.
  - The [content length](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#content-length) MUST have a value
    equal to the length of the plaintext being encrypted.
    - For a regular frame the length of this plaintext MUST equal the frame length.

>     - For a final frame this MUST be length of the remaining plaintext bytes

Reviewer 3: np: `this MUST be length` `this MUST be the length`

      which have not yet been encrypted,
      whose length MUST be equal to or less than the frame length.
- The IV is the [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number)
  used in the message body AAD above,
  padded to the [IV length](../data-format/message-header.md#iv-length).
- The cipherkey is the derived data key
- The plaintext is the next subsequence of available plaintext bytes that have not yet been encrypted.
  - For a regular frame the length of this plaintext subsequence MUST equal the frame length.
  - For a final frame this MUST be the remaining plaintext bytes which have not yet been encrypted,
    whose length MUST be equal to or less than the frame length.

> this operation MUST serialize a regular frame or final frame with the following specifics:

Reviewer 3: np: `this` -> `This`

such that the serialized frame isn't required to remain in memory to complete
the [signature calculation](#signature-calculation).

### Construct the Signature

If the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md) contains a [signature algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#signature-algorithm),
this operation MUST calculate a signature over the message,
and the output [encrypted message](#encrypted-message) MUST contain a [message footer](../data-format/message-footer.md).

To calculate a signature, this operation MUST use the [signature algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#signature-algorithm)
specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md), with the following input:

- the signature key is the [signing key](../framework/structures.md#signing-key) in the [encryption materials](../framework/structures.md#encryption-materials)
- the input to sign is the concatenation of the serialization of the [message header](../data-format/message-header.md) and [message body](../data-format/message-body.md)

Note that the message header and message body MAY have already been inputted during previous steps.

> This operation MUST then serialize serialized a message footer with the following specifics:

Reviewer 3: np: `serialize serialized` -> `serialize`

The encrypted message outputted by this operation MUST have a message header equal
to the message header calculated in this step.

If the algorithm suite contains a signature algorithm and
this operation is streaming the encrypted message output to the caller,
this operation MUST input the serialized header to the signature algorithm as soon as it is serialized,
such that the serialized header isn't required to remain in memory to complete
the [signature calculation](#signature-calculation).

## Construct the body

The encrypted message outputted by this operation MUST have a message body equal
to the message body calculated in this step.

While there MAY still be plaintext left to encrypt,
this operation MUST either wait for more plaintext to become available,
wait for an end to the plaintext to be indicated,
or perform encryption on the available plaintext to construct frames
which make up the message body.

Frames MUST be constructed sequentially such that the concatenation of their decryption
in [sequence number](#.../data-format/message-body.md#sequence-number)
order is equal to the input plaintext which has been encrypted so far.

> If more input plaintext MAY become available

Author: I've updated this section to reframe it as "before EOF, process as many available bytes into regular frames as you can", "after EOF, follow these steps to process the remaining bytes".

  - The [Body AAD Content](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#body-aad-content) depends on
    whether the thing being encrypted is a regular frame or final frame.
    Refer to [Message Body AAD](../data-format/message-body-aad.md) specification for more information.
  - The [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number) is the sequence
    number of the frame being encrypted.
    If this is the first frame sequentially, this value MUST be 1.
    Otherwise, this value MUST be 1 greater than the value of the sequence number
    of the previous frame.
  - The [content length](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#content-length) MUST have a value
    equal to the length of the plaintext being encrypted.
    - For a regular frame the length of this plaintext MUST equal the frame length.
    - For a final frame this MUST be the length of the remaining plaintext bytes
      which have not yet been encrypted,
      whose length MUST be equal to or less than the frame length.
- The IV is the [sequence number](../data-format/message-body-aad.md#sequence-number)
  used in the message body AAD above,

>   padded to the [IV length](../data-format/message-header.md#iv-length).

Reviewer: You still want the "to " though?

- The cipherkey is the derived data key
- The plaintext is the next subsequence of consumable plaintext bytes that have not yet been encrypted.
  - For a regular frame the length of this plaintext subsequence MUST equal the frame length.
  - For a final frame this MUST be the remaining plaintext bytes which have not yet been encrypted,
    whose length MUST be equal to or less than the frame length.

This operation MUST serialize a regular frame or final frame with the following specifics:

- [Sequence Number](../data-format/message-body.md#sequence-number): MUST be the sequence number of this frame,
  as determined above.
- [IV](../data-format/message-body.md#iv): MUST be the IV used when calculating the encrypted content above
- [Encrypted Content](../data-format/message-body.md#encrypted-content): MUST be the encrypted content calculated above.
- [Authentication Tag](../data-format/message-body.md#authentication-tag): MUST be the authentication tag
  outputted when calculating the encrypted content above.

Once the entire frame is serialized,

> the serialized frame MAY be released.

Reviewer: I think the more important statement here is the implicit opposite: "The serialized frame MUST NOT be released before the entire frame is serialized". Perhaps it would be better to state that instead.

Given that, I'm not sure we need to weigh in on the MAY vs. SHOULD part on when it IS released.

and the output [encrypted message](#encrypted-message) MUST contain a [message footer](../data-format/message-footer.md).

To calculate a signature, this operation MUST use the [signature algorithm](../framework/algorithm-suites.md#signature-algorithm)
specified by the [algorithm suite](../framework/algorithm-suites.md), with the following input:

- the signature key is the [signing key](../framework/structures.md#signing-key) in the [encryption materials](../framework/structures.md#encryption-materials)
- the input to sign is the concatenation of the serialization of the [message header](../data-format/message-header.md) and [message body](../data-format/message-body.md)

Note that the message header and message body MAY have already been inputted during previous steps.

This operation MUST then serialize a message footer with the following specifics:

- [Signature Length](../data-format/message-footer.md#signature-length): MUST be the length of the
  output of the calculation above.
- [Signature](../data-format/message-footer.md#signature): MUST be the output of the calculation above.

Once the entire message is signed and the message footer is serialized,

> the serialized message footer MAY be released.

Reviewer: Same as above, although in this case it feels like this statement and the next one could just be combined into one, since there's only one correct moment in time to release this.

[message header authentication](../data-format/message-header.md#header-authentication)
with the following specifics.

- [IV](../data-format/message-header.md#iv): MUST have the value of the IV used in the calculation above,
  padded to the [IV length](../data-format/message-header.md#iv-length) with 0.
- [Authentication Tag](../data-format/message-header.md#authentication-tag): MUST have the value
  of the authentication tag calculated above.

The serialized bytes MUST NOT be released until the entire message header has been serialized
If this operation is streaming the encrypted message and

> once the entire message header has been serialized,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the entire message header has been serialized,
```

The encrypted message outputted by this operation MUST have a message body equal
to the message body calculated in this step.

If [Plaintext Length Bound](#plaintext-length-bound) was specified on input
and this operation determines at any time that the plaintext being encrypted
has a length greater than this value,
this operation MUST immediately fail.

Before it is indicated that no more plaintext will be available,
this operation MUST process as much of the available bytes as possible
by [constructing regular frames](#construct-a-frame).

When it is indicated that no more plaintext will be available,
this operation MUST perform the following until all available plaintext is processed:

- If there are enough input plaintext bytes available to create a new regular frame,
  then this operation MUST [construct a regular frame](#construct-a-frame).
  using the available plaintext.

> - If there are exactly enough plaintext bytes available to create one regular frame,

Author: ah, this should be a strict `>`, `<`, vs `==`. which means I should update the first to specify exactly `>` (and reorder so the == is first).

  then this operation MUST [construct either a final frame or regular frame](#construct-a-frame)
  with the remaining plaintext.

>   If they construct a regular frame, they MUST also construct an empty final frame.

Reviewer: There's actually a bug here with the edge case of an empty plaintext: technically the while loop immediately terminates and you don't require an empty final frame.

It may be better to move this line to after the loop and state "If a final frame has not yet been constructed, they MUST construct an empty final frame"

has a length greater than this value,
this operation MUST immediately fail.

> Before and end to the input is indicated,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before the end of the input is indicated,
```

this operation MUST process as much of the consumable bytes as possible
by [constructing regular frames](#construct-a-frame).

> When end to the input is indicated,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the end of the input is indicated,
```

- [Authentication Tag](../data-format/message-body.md#authentication-tag): MUST be the authentication tag
  outputted when calculating the encrypted content above.

The above serialized bytes MUST NOT be released until the entire frame has been serialized.
If this operation is streaming the encrypted message and

> once the entire frame has been serialized,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the entire frame has been serialized,
```
